Blog: rebase and reformat git branches (#12)
meroton/docs: blog/2023-12-14-rebase-and-reformat-git-branches-automatically.md

This contains a few oneliners you can run to tidy up your commits.

See also the full technical guide for developing this `git-rebase` workflow
in [our documentation].
This contains more details on rebasing with `git`,
using a scriptable editor to automate the `git-rebase` todo-list,
as well as the squashed commit messages.

[our documentation]: /docs/practice/rebase-and-reformat-git-branches-automatically
[full technical guide]: /docs/practice/rebase-and-reformat-git-branches-automatically

## Example commits

Say you have three unmerged commits:

    21cc7b5 My amazing feature
    e05fd9f Other complimentary work
    acb9fae Fix annoying bug

They contain important work, but you forgot to run some linters,
or the main branch added more lint requirements after the feature work was started.
This will run linters that can automatically fix issues on each commit
and apply that through a scripted `git-rebase`.

## Rebase algorithm

We have a three-step process to update each commit.

* 1: Create a fixup commit with the applied lint suggestions,
  which we immediately revert
  so the next commit still applies

  ```bash title=reformat.sh
  #!/bin/sh

>   revert() {
>       # 'git-revert' does not support '--allow-empty'
>       subject=$(git log -1 --format=%s)
>       shaid=$(git log -1 --format=%H)
>       revert_message="Revert: $subject
> 
>   This reverts commit: $shaid"
> 
>       git revert --no-commit HEAD
>       git commit --allow-empty -m "$revert_message"
>   }
> 
>   tools/run.py 7..13
>   git add -u
>   git commit --allow-empty --fixup HEAD
>   revert

Reviewer: It's better if we can keep all the additions to the `reformat.sh` script at the end.

```suggestion
  ./run-all-linters-and-auto-fixers
  
  # Add a new commit with the changes and revert it again.
  git add -u
  git commit --allow-empty --fixup HEAD
  # 'git-revert' does not support '--allow-empty'
  git revert --no-commit HEAD
  git commit --allow-empty --no-edit
```

Author: Ack, it _does_ create the commit message. Good that we do not have to.

and it is nice to have a scriptable but interactive editor
to make changes to the workflow and try out the commands.

See the [full technical guide] for details and more tips on `git-rebase` and `vim`.

Reformat:
```
$ env                          \
    GIT_SEQUENCE_EDITOR="true" \
    git rebase -i --exec ./reformat.sh origin/main
```
Fixup:
```
# If your commit messages are all unique you can use '--autosquash' instead.
# See the technical guide for more details.
$ env                                                             \
    GIT_SEQUENCE_EDITOR="vim +'g/^\w* \w* fixup!/s/^pick/fixup/'" \
    git rebase -i origin/main
```
Squash:
```
$ env                                                                                               \
    EDITOR="sed -i '1,9d'"                                                                          \
    GIT_SEQUENCE_EDITOR="vim +'g/^#/d' +'normal! Gdk' +'g/^pick \w* Revert \"fixup!/normal! j0ces'" \
    git rebase -i origin/main
```

:::info
We have not developed the *incantation*, `git-rebase` command,
to preserve the author date from the original commits.
We will address that next!

> :::

Reviewer: I haven't verified the code. Unless you would like to try it, I'll try it another day.

```suggestion
:::

## Single pass update

Using a multi step approach is a good way to review the intermediate results. If you are feeling lucky, you may do it all in one pass, with correctness regards to keeping the original author information.

  ```bash title=reformat.sh
  #!/bin/sh

  ./run-all-linters-and-auto-fixers

  # Add a new commit with the changes and revert it again.
  git add -u
  git commit --allow-empty --fixup HEAD
  fixup_commit=$(git rev-parse HEAD)
  git reset --soft HEAD~
  original_commit=$(git rev-parse HEAD)
  if [ "$(git show -q --format=%s HEAD~)" = "revert-identifier" ]; then
    git reset --soft HEAD~
  fi
  git commit --amend --no-edit -c "$original_commit"

  # 'git-revert' does not support '--allow-empty'
  git revert --no-commit "$fixup_commit"
  git commit --allow-empty -m "revert-identifier"
  ` ` `

After the rebase, don't forget `git checkout HEAD~` to remove the last revert.
```
